new-post: pdf and ROOT file previews in web UI (#36)
reanahub/blog.reana.io: content/posts/2023/pdf-root-files-preview.md

---
title: "Introducing PDF and ROOT file previews in REANA web"
date: 2023-06-26T14:00:00+01:00
---

> We are excited to announce that the REANA web interface now supports previewing of PDF and ROOT files.

Reviewer: BTW, on the similar tune: it may be better to enlarge the scope of this blog post to present everything previewable, so to speak. Hence we could show an example of previewing HTML files by means of Snakemake report, say that it was there since quite some time, and only then speak about PDF and ROOT that were added recently. In this way, the blog post could serve as a comprehensive information for the file previewing topic, also for future reference. This will make its value apparent so that people wouldn't think "why another blog post for something that was already announced (albeit in a few lines)".  If we go for this, the blog post title should obviously change too, into something more generic, for example _"Previewing your workspace files"_.

This means that instead of downloading these files to view them, you can simply inspect them right away,
without leaving your browser!

<!--more-->

For a long time, the REANA web UI has allowed users to preview certain types of files present in the

> workflow workspace. This has proven to be very handy for users who want to quickly glance through

Reviewer: very handy -> very convenient

images and text files in their workspaces without having to download them. We are now extending
this capability to PDF and ROOT files as well.

## PDF files preview

> Starting from REANA 0.9.1, when you click on a PDF file in your workflow's workspace in the web UI, an embedded 

Reviewer 2: (very minor)  Trailing space:
```suggestion
Starting from REANA 0.9.1, when you click on a PDF file in your workflow's workspace in the web UI, an embedded
```

PDF viewer will load the document. You will be able to scroll through pages, zoom in and out,

> or even download the PDF if necessary. 

Reviewer 2: (very minor) Trailing space:
```suggestion
or even download the PDF if necessary.
```

You can use it to quickly inspect the content of any PDF generated by your analysis or uploaded to your
workspace.
Here is a sneak peek of how it looks:

![PDF file preview](/images/pdf-files-preview.png)

## ROOT files preview

> ROOT files can also be previewed directly in the web UI.

Reviewer: It may be useful to link, since some REANA readers from other scientific disciplines may not be familiar with ROOT. Hence:

[ROOT](https://root.cern.ch/) files...

We have embedded a ROOT file viewer, based on [JSROOT](https://root.cern/js/), enabling you to inspect your
ROOT files without leaving your browser.
You can navigate through the file structure, interact with charts and ROOT objects, zoom on some details,
and download the file if needed.
Here you can see the ROOT file viewer in action:

> ![ROOT file preview](/images/root-files-preview.gif)

Reviewer: The image needs update and can be taken from the 0.9.1 release blog post.

These enhancements aim to save time and streamline the process of navigating and inspecting files
in your REANA workflow workspace.
We are continually working on improving your experience with REANA, and we hope that
they will prove beneficial in your research and data analysis.
If you have any feedback or suggestions, please don't hesitate to reach out.

## See also:

> - [Previewing HTML files since REANA 0.8.1](/posts/2022/reana-0.8.1/#previewing-html-workspace-files-directly)

Reviewer: We need also to link to https://blog.reana.io/posts/2023/reana-0.9.1/#previewing-pdf-and-root-files

I would call the first item "Previewing HTML files" (since REANA 0.8.1), and the second list item "Previewing PDF and ROOT files" (since REANA 0.9.1).

This means that instead of downloading these files to view them, you can simply click and inspect them right away,
without leaving your browser!

<!--more-->

For a long time, the REANA web UI has allowed users to preview certain types of files present in the
workflow workspace. This has proven to be very handy for users who want to quickly glance through
images and text files in their workspaces without having to download them. We are now extending
this capability to PDF and ROOT files as well.

### PDF Files Preview

Starting from REANA 0.9.1, when you navigate to a PDF file in your workflow workspace, an embedded 
PDF viewer will load the document. You will be able to scroll through pages, zoom in and out,
or even download the PDF if necessary. 
You can use it to quickly inspect the content of any PDF generated by your analysis or uploaded to your
workspace.
Here is a sneak peek of how it looks:

![PDF file preview](/images/pdf-files-preview.png)

### ROOT Files Preview

As for the ROOT files, we took an extra step forward to bring you a seamless preview experience.
We have embedded a ROOT file viewer, based on [JSROOT](https://root.cern/js/), enabling you to inspect your

> ROOT files without leaving the browser window in which you browse your workspace.

Author: I shortened the sentence to only leave "without leaving the browser", since now I am using "directly" in the previous sentence.

You can navigate through the file structure, interact with charts and ROOT objects, zoom on some details,
and download the file if needed.

> Here is a small animation of the ROOT file viewer in action:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here you can see the ROOT file viewer in action:
```
What do you think?

![ROOT file preview](/images/root-files-preview.gif)

These enhancements aim to save time and streamline the process of navigating and inspecting files

> in your REANA workflow workspace. We hope that they will prove beneficial in your research and data analysis.

Reviewer 2: We can maybe remove this paragraph? Or maybe merge it with the following one?

We are continually working on improving your experience with REANA, and we would love to hear your
thoughts on these new features. If you have any feedback or suggestions, please don't hesitate to reach out.

## See also:

> - [Previewing HTML file since REANA 0.8.1](/posts/2022/reana-0.8.1/)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Previewing HTML files since REANA 0.8.1](/posts/2022/reana-0.8.1/#previewing-html-workspace-files-directly)
```
Let's link directly to the relevant section
